you're looking at the biggest
narco-trafficker in the world
[Music]
he didn't do what he asked you to do you
jerk Pablo's plan was to weaken Colombia
did you want him alive where you wanted
him dead I wanted to be happy to
everywhere was a revenge of course it
was
for millions of you who have watched
narcos I'm talking the story of a
criminal the most powerful criminal of
all time the biggest drug dealer if you
want to call of all time Pablo Escobar
and this serious became a phenomenon
because of these two gentlemen here
sitting next to me that we're gonna get
into here in a minute steve murphey and
have your penny I want to give you some
stats if you do not know who Pablo
Escobar was and what he did here's some
stats this is in the 80s and the 90s
in the 80s and the 90s Pablo Escobar was
responsible for 80% of the cocaine
traffic world wide according to Forbes
magazine that they came out in the early
90s they said his net worth was
somewhere around thirty billion dollars
well when when they announced his net
worth was thirty billion dollars his son
contacted Forbes and laughed and said
you're out of your mind it was much more
than that at that time it was a seventh
richest man in the world the man sold so
much cocaine and had so much cash that
he spent twenty five hundred dollars a
month
buying rubber bands just to hold up the
cash there is still billions of dollars
of cash still till today still till
today stashed all over Colombia rats ate
a half a billion dollars of his fortune
every year he once burned two million
dollars to keep his daughter warm he was
offered to pay off the national debt of
Colombia of ten billion dollars again I
Pablo Escobar I'm offering the
government to pay off your national debt
of ten billion dollars and they
obviously declined when Pablo dated his
wife he was 24 years old first time and
his daughter his wife was 13 years old
in total he owned roughly eight hundred
homes and villas 15 tons of cocaine was
sold a day that's 30,000 pounds per day
in his house he built 20 lakes
according to 60 minutes he was making
420 million dollars a week and there was
eventually a ten million dollar hit on
Pablo Escobar and having said that this
character we just talked about Pablo
Escobar these gentlemen were responsible
for leading the DEA team to finally take
him down Pablo Escobar on December 2nd
1993 gentlemen thank you so much for
joining us thank you appreciate it
appreciate it being here so when they
told you guys this is your project
you're gonna be going your
responsibilities to go catch this crazy
here and you got to take him down what
was your initial reaction when you were
told Pablo's your project well my
initial reaction was how do we attack
this how do we go after him I mean
you're looking at the biggest
narco-trafficker in the world and you
know what we tell people we never
realized we knew he was a drug
trafficker but we never realized that
violence that he had behind him puts
made it very difficult the sicarios the
assassin scene you know you had I had
never even heard of water Sicario was
and then all of a sudden here's Pablo
Escobar who has hundreds we calculate
five 600 see Carlos working for him in
the violence he did not care his message
was killed anybody who gets in my way
and if they don't comply with me like I
said you know wipe them out wasn't
really that brutal the brutality the
barbaric side of him is something that I
can I will never understand my main
question is why innocent people why kill
all this innocent people if you look at
the Avianca commercial airline it was
all innocent people on that plane if you
look at the famous das building which
was like the local FBI office in in
Bogota you know a lot of innocent people
and he was just trying to kill one
person he's the bounty some police
officers so it's something that I could
never comprehend and then the famous car
bombs you know and that's why we call
Paulo squirrel the inventor of
narco-terrorism he's the inventor of
narco-terrorism you say the inventor
he's the one who created that concept
and we had never seen we had seen all
right turf wars hey go kill this people
but you know like I said it was just why
all the innocent people that he went
after in just people that were at the
wrong place at the wrong time
that he was killing so let me ask you
when you took the job when you said okay
are you directed to take it with no
options or do you have a choice to say
yea or nay when you're taking this
respond because that's somebody in the
military they tell you what to do you
have to take the orders you can
really do you have a choice to say no to
it or it was a challenge for us of
course we're not gonna say no I never
realized the magnitude what I love the
empire that public war controlled I
don't think he's in one of us no a DEA
agent they would have ever said no to a
challenge and I read about you saying
that I read about you saying the fact
that the level of a commitment that DEA
agents have to each other and how it
went from where it was that at that time
and today the numbers and ninety offices
in 71 different countries DEA which is
much bigger than FBI so just kind of
shows the level of development that the
leaders that develop in the leaders
within the departments go back to when
did Pablo become Pablo I mean you have
to study this character so Pablo was
Pablo way before we found out about
Pablo because apparently became a
millionaire at 23 years old or some
number like that so as you're doing your
investigation into this guy what are
some things you're finding out about
this guy that's making you want to take
him down that I got there in 1988 to me
it was the drug distribution network
that he had all of a sudden we're seeing
I remember people who tell knows there'd
be about five six airplanes on a
clandestine runway in the jungles you
know five to six airplanes a daily basis
they would say about 500 kilos of
cocaine and you would have airplanes
going into Mexico Central America then
the Caribbean islands you know their
goal was to try to get it into the South
Florida area so the the level of
distribution the people working for him
the guys who owned the planes one of the
main hours remember is they loved their
planes they wanted to buy as many
airplanes as possible so you had black
market dealers in the Florida area
buying airplanes to send back that was a
hot hot commodity but then also your
cocaine labs 10 to 15 in the jungles and
this labs are making a thousand kilos of
cocaine on a daily basis so the the the
labs working you they press the kilos I
remember in steel boxes the labyrinth
or Easwar just enormous you know about a
hundred people used to work for her to
her laboratory they had rules and one
thing I always tell people I'll never
forget he had science in his laboratory
said we catch you using the product we
will kill you so he didn't want his
workers to using the product right but
then it was like I said the coordinates
it would send coordinates to Mexico the
famous general Noriega in Panama the
Caribbean islands it was just something
how do you get that organized and we we
always say Pablo was the CEO he was not
the one working the distribution it was
his first cousin
Mustafa Gaviria Rivero and they grew up
together they grew up poor but they were
they were they were like brothers they
loved each other but most I will develop
that knack for the distribution network
sending it all over the world so who was
the businessman was it Gustavo or was it
Pablo Gustavo was the businessman Pablo
was the CEO Gustavo I'm sorry Gustavo
was the hands-on director chief
operating officer and as you know look
that's a great operation so he ran
operations yea he ran the operations
because we used to intercept the phone
calls got in there was he would the
directions he was the guy who was
getting his hands dirty
Pablo was not Pablo wasn't top Pablo was
the one who was given orders what made
people want to follow Pablo because when
you study this Pablo character you mean
people who tell they're not not the way
was in Arcis you will see that they say
Pablo wasn't the best speaker he wanted
to be a speaker like some of these other
politicians but he wasn't so what made
Pablo such a great persuader where other
people wanted to follow this guy and
take orders from him there's there's a
couple things and honestly we hesitate
to give him credit for anything but he
did have somewhat of a charismatic
personality you know he was able to
persuade people but now you look at his
business model and this is the other
thing if you didn't do what he asked you
to do he killed you so you know that
reputation gets out there and so if he
comes to you face to face and ask you to
do something chances are you're probably
going to do it because you fear for your
life right you know I mean we were talk
a little bit earlier just even in the
insurance business how how much quicker
could you have risen to the top if you
had killed your competitors and I'm
I was we're saying that tongue-in-cheek
it's ridiculous to say something like
that but that was his business model he
introduced a level of drug trafficking
to the United States and eventually to
the entire world
that we had never seen before and it was
you know if he wants to show narcos that
the end of that first trailer of season
1 Boyd Holbrook who plays me in the show
makes a statement we didn't know what we
were in for that's absolutely true the
United States was not prepared for what
Pablo entered the serious country you
had you had no idea what you were going
up against at one point that you realize
this guy's gonna go cross the line no
matter what it is like if we think about
going here he's gonna go here so if
you're gonna match this guy you kind of
got to go here to face him at what point
did you realize how powerful this guy is
one thing I think originally by the time
we were involved in it we all knew who
probably was because I'm you got to
Colombia 1988 I got there in 1991 the
cases that I'd been working on in Miami
I think all were eventually tied into
the Medellin Cartel and Pablo so we were
already familiar when we got down there
but the fact that you know when you get
there we I didn't know I was going to be
working against Pablo Escobar in the
midian cartel you know I was hyper had a
partner in Gary Gary Sheridan at the
time that you guys have been working it
for three years
well Gary and I had some mutual friends
and got to be friends and that's how I
got to be friends with Javier and then
Gary gets promoted transferred and it
just made you know sense that that
hybrid I would partner up full-time
partners it's been like that since 1991
POW will remember his forte was South
Florida Miami especially he had a lot of
people working for him and in the South
Florida area that was his home base he
concentrated you know I remember they
called it
I used to quote name it Las Palmas palm
trees everybody was Miami
he doesn't remember we're sending 100
head of white cattle to Las Palmas you
know 100 keys of cold koi yeah it was
just it was that simple you learn the
language eventually you yeah yeah I mean
everything had a code name they tried to
hide it but New York was less daughters
the towers you know Mexico was slow song
there darkness big hats like I will go
to Oh somebody rollers everybody to you
so it but I like you said his for
TEI was always Miami that's where he had
a lot of people working for him the
distributors the guy who were receiving
the loads you know but like you said
they had their contacts in Mexico also I
mean they would send out coordinates
where the airplanes were led in Mexico
it was just you know unbelievable but
the amount of coke that was coming out
so I noticed you guys give a lot of
credit to Kiki right you kept giving
credit to Kiki what was this last time I
Miranda come out or not yeah and he was
on the cover of what was a time magazine
that it was on the cover of Time and he
worked with the Guadalajara cartel that
he was working on why why was Kiki such
a big almost like a face a hero to you
guys in your world what did he paved the
way for you what was the story behind
him this was before we came on the job
so we're talking the early 1980s Makiki
was trying to do basically what we
eventually were trying to do in Colombia
and that's go up against these violent
cartels Kiki paid the ultimate price you
know he was kidnapped by the police he
was tortured repeatedly the reports that
we heard were there was that he was
killed several times and they had a
doctor that would inject adrenaline into
his heart to bring him back to life so
they could continue his torturing we all
know eventually he was murdered and so
then we saw the reaction the United
States government about Kiki's death and
at that time our administrator was able
to go to Capitol Hill and it put the
pressure at the White House so that for
a very short period of time the border
between the United States and Mexico was
closed because the Mexican authorities
didn't want to cooperate with the United
States investigation unless I think it
was less than an hour you know they got
a call from the Mexican government
saying okay okay we're back in the
investigation we'll continue our
investigation now when we're involved
with narcos and the making of narcos and
working with Eric Newman and the writers
one of the things that Harvey and I
requested is they put a reference in
there at Kiki Camarena because he's a
true American Hero you know the whole
Red Ribbon Campaign in the United States
is an honor of Kiki Camarena so in our
book he's a true hero Wow right
enlighten Lexi fed Kiki Camarena is it's
an idol we've always idolized him look
up to him I was a brand new agent and I
was involved in that search so I will
always remember I got a call from our
boss Joe toxis over here
you know I spoke Spanish I was in Austin
and I was involved for a couple of
months in the search of Cameron and like
Steve said they they tortured the poor
guy they let him die in peace they did
not they tortured him and then one of
the things that da did was we never gave
up on finding the people and I think we
found pretty much everybody who was
involved here's my question for you when
you go up against a guy like Pablo okay
and like I was saying earlier if this is
the threshold he's willing to go here
right and you as a DDA you're confined
into certain things that you have to
follow like you can't go past certain
things they tell you now at least this
is what we see as a citizen from the
outside I'm not on the insect because
you're both negative and positive
there's stuff that says don't even trust
a government official you know about FBI
CIA DEA you hear all this stuff right if
you're going up against a guy that's
gonna cross the line he's gonna cheat no
matter what how do you beat a guy like
that that's willing to cheat that you're
confining some of the rules that you
have to follow that's a really good
question and not to get on our soap
boxes here but in our lives there are a
few things that we actually control you
have three children three small children
right you make your plans but then your
child comes home and says dad I've got a
project due in the morning your whole
evenings plans just changed so there's a
lot of things in our lives that we
really don't control we think we do but
we don't because there's a lot of
outside interferences but there's
absolutely one thing in every one of our
lives that we control individually and
that is our integrity now we'll tell you
right up front we broke rules policies
and procedures on a regular basis in
Columbia we have never never never
broken the law we never stepped across
that line how do you control that
because let me explain to what I see
from my standpoint right you crossed the
line with me on my family side I'm sorry
you know it's just you know this is this
is blood right this guy's willing to go
at all cost how do you go up against
that to match it you know it's very
tough to match it like I remember one
time what did Reagan say Reagan said I
don't negotiate with terrorists remember
I had that line I don't negotiate with
terrorists of course you're not gonna
negotiate with terrorists cuz like are
you either do this I'm gonna kill he's
gonna kill you no matter what so this is
not a regular guy you're facing how does
how does an organization like you match
up against and I'm not talking integrity
wise because you know how in the end in
the series it shows a kernel carry Uriah
it's not a real character it's really
Hugo Martinez in the series it shows the
fact that there was one guy he was
afraid of and he was intimidated up
because he could match his terror at
that level and a guy like that is always
afraid of somebody that's willing to
match that how do you put the fear in a
guy like him was the strategy to go
after the cousin to see oh oh
Gustavo so it kind of cripples him that
that's the part I really want to know
because what you guys thought oh yeah
one of the best things that ever
happened is that Steve and I lived at
the search bloc base the school was
called the Carlos Holguin school and it
was in the middle of a neighborhood so
we slept there we ate with our and we
had a specialized group of cops working
with him like he's Steve said we
wouldn't had our operations pretty much
every day so we knew what was going on
we were trusted by our group they
trusted us and this is a Colombian the
Colombia yeah it's called the the Dene
group of the Colombian national police
the Dene di9 and their DEA or is that
there is no it's their specialized unit
sort of investigative plainclothes unit
they're not caught in it and we knew
this guy's working with them in Bogota
so they knew us so um different projects
from different projects different
projects so one Kabul Escobar you know
they hand-picked this guys because they
had pick some guys from Medellin but you
know probably would get to their
families you know they started they were
corrupt so they would tell Pablo you
know when they were coming for him so
this guys were all came from different
areas it was very interesting at the
beginning there was a lot of phone calls
being made we created Colonel Martinez
came in and pretty much did not tell
anybody you know where the operations
were just kept it at a select for you
know phone calls from anywhere load up
at night we're going here you know so we
would have the con royal trucks we
hadn't seen the base was made up of
uniformed police officers also
hand-picked in the investigative unit so
it was great because the investigative
unit
would come back boss we think we got
probably located all right
uniformed officers mount up and they
were from a group called I would love
which was their specialized it was
jungle operation type dice the concept
which is what I think da did right was a
more of a world type concept where they
said Columbia you go after Pablo Escobar
in Colombia a United States DEA we're
gonna go after Pablo Escobar wherever
he's at all over the world Europe Miami
New York
yeah the ei so our offices which was a
brand new concept were instructed you go
after anybody that's associated with
Pablo Escobar which was great so we were
attacking him in the United States and
the Colombians were attacking him in
Colombia so this is the first time that
we see a structure of an organization
that you're gonna attack it it at both
at both sites I guess my question is the
following question when you take down a
guy like that that has to leave a
certain playbook for the next person
that possibly decides to be like that
here's the process we first do this then
we do this then we do this there's a
system behind it right like right now we
have El Chapo you're dealing with
Joaquin el chapo I think it's Guzman is
like this one so when you're going
through someone does that leave a
playbook and if it is what is step
number one two three do you have a
protocol for it I'm just thinking from
the outside of myself if I'm an innocent
if I'm a guy that I wasn't out in your
world step number one study everybody
that he's close to him step number two
who's his number one customer step
number three who's his number one ally
step number four is that the approaches
that that orthotic or not really either
what you hit it right on the head you go
after you just don't go after all right
I'm gonna go after public what you
target the money launderers you target
the guys who are buying the airplanes
you target the guys for work in the labs
in the United States there's
distribution heads all over the place
that receive it so it's a joint effort
you just don't say I'm going after chop
on going after Pablo Escobar you got to
go after everybody that's involved in
the organization for it to finally work
and I think the great
was at the end of the betting cartel
pretty much everybody was taken off
everybody was killed there's some
hundreds thousands of people that went
to jail that were working for Pablo
Escobar so it was a different concept
you know one of the things to just to
clarify a point but also to give credit
where credit's due
I mean I get all the credit for Pablo
Escobar it wasn't just us I mean when
DEA just didn't take two guys and say
that's your case go work on it
we had agents analysts support personnel
all around the world and that's one of
the beauties of DEA having this huge
footprint around the world how big was
it at that time Steve how big was a d8
I'm agent wise there was only thirty
five hundred agents where's it right now
comparable it's supposed to be a five
thousand I think they're they're got
classes ongoing now trying to get to the
level back up and admit five thousands
but I've heard though and you know what
we we we had the best analysts in in the
world I mean I remember they used to
give us packages hey here's this guy
here are the associates the analysts
from the states yes coming to state your
target package yeah yeah yeah to you at
that like how are they communicating
that to you was it we had people
assigned in Bogota and then from
headquarters they would send it over you
know I mean obviously electronically
secure methods so so here's a question
so was there ever a time where Pablo's
military was stronger than Colombia's
military like was there every time where
because that's the scary part if
somebody if a citizens military stronger
than yours what they you desperately
need some help right did it ever get to
that point well at that first manhunt
you saw what happened he negotiated a
surrender to a self built prison
basically he'd beat the government at
that point so he was as strong if not
stronger than the government at that
point and when that happened you were
pretty disappointed one yeah right and
that was there an awful limit there's a
lot of killings going on during the for
the first time because of the sicarios
or a lot of like said though the bombs
the killings in basically Pablo's
planned was to weaken Colombia by
weakening I'm talking about I'm gonna
kill as many people as I can that way I
will negotiate that's what he all
he wanted to negotiate his surrender and
one thing a lot of people miss or does
not get brought up in our I mean I'm
just not sure why but it's extradition
the art you know that his number one
fight on Columbia his number one fight
for the in the start of terrorism was he
did not want to get extradited to the
United States that was he knew would be
over at that time that's when he offered
the ten billion dollars to the
government say we'll pay off your debt
just don't extradite me right leave me
around right yeah and he wanted to be I
mean you know he wanted to be pressed I
don't know Columbia he wanted to pay off
their debt and we've always said you
know if Pablo Escobar was a good person
he would have been a great president so
I want to finish up this start here so
we can transition into the next part go
back to being in high school okay you're
in high school it helps you to have a
cousin that's everybody's afraid of it
helps you to have a cousin or a friend
or an older brother or somebody that you
just listen you mess with javi
you know Joey's coming did you guys have
also somebody where you're like okay
listen we broke some rules all the time
we didn't we've always had our integrity
but we broke the rules but there was
somebody that he was very scared of
where this guy could cross the line in
the movie is Colonel you know career but
in real life was there somebody that he
was afraid of that could match his
madness I think he's scared of Colonel
Martinez and I agree Colonel Marti was
so Martinez is really some of the
stories of Martinez Ascari oh we're not
saying Colonel Martinez by any means
would have broken the law like Pablo he
was just incorruptible and Pablo knew
that I mean there was one instance that
Colonel Martinez's apartment building
that all the other residents in that
apartment building signed a letter
asking Colonel Martinez and his family
to move out because they thought they
were afraid Pablo was gonna blow up the
building and they would be killed simply
because Carl Martinez lived there so the
man was incorruptible and he didn't move
out he stayed no yeah he said and I saw
him once break down
I saw him were at her meeting and
emotion like Oh more emotionally when he
he he wanted out I mean he wanted out
because Pablo was threatening his
family and basically said hey this is
getting just way out of hand it's too
personal my family and at a weak moment
he wanted out at a weak moment he
thought about it it was brought him back
came back and did not give up I've
always admired that about him I mean
here's Pablo Escobar trying to kill your
family and you know imagine being Pablo
Escobar's worst enemy which was Colonel
Martinez so how do we didn't do anything
to him he know there's a lot of
protection Colonel Martinez obviously
you know he hit his family but I think
it's strengthened he moved out and he
hit him he hit him I'm obviously know
because Pablo was trying to kill him
there's a letter where he threatens
Martinez you know what I think it just
read strengthened Martinez resolved to
be shot
I bet yeah the strategy from the police
and it was I think it's what really won
the war against public bar was used to
tell us that we're not here to seize
money we're not here to see stoke we're
here to get Pablo Escobar so it was a
different resolve it was it was personal
impersonal because of all the police
officers that Pablo killed I mean if you
look at the numbers of police officers
that he killed when he started bounties
we went to a funeral where the church
who were they eight coffins of police
officers and in every day the the car
bombs you know the hiring people the
bounties on police officers a search
became a war because he got personal he
announces that he wants to run for
office not announces but you can very
much ignore him this is before bang so
let me ask you it got personal before he
ran and if it got it did not know that
person beforehand right personal
afterwards it was afterwards he got
personal afterwards because of the
people that he started killed and he saw
the famous justice minister Rodrigo a
lot of Bonilla but he killed him after
what he said about him right so what's
on so I want to know what was the parkus
here's fort for longest time he was
saying
sell flowers I have a flower business
right and I'm an entrepreneur you have
this an abscess people were kind of
leaving him alone right right and this
was at the beginning right he used to go
to Midian they loved him you know people
you should see him it wasn't until I
think really the mid eighties that we
started finding out that Pablo Suarez
responsible did somebody like you know
how you study a guy like Hitler maybe
you know let's just say guy like hip let
me see what is wrong with a person to
wake up one day to decide that he wants
to go out there and you know get rid of
an entire you know a society community
now what is wrong with you to do that
and then when you read the book of mine
called or if you study his stories and
all this other stuff you realize there
was a time that somebody hurt his ego
and it was more it was not necessarily
anything extravagant that you would
think that somebody did something to his
wife family kids someone crossed the
line and hit his ego and he says I want
to make this a life
determination to go after it who hurt
his ego publicly because in the movie
it's that one scene where you guys are
sitting in the back and after kind of
doing a little due diligence you guys
weren't in there when he got up and he
said we've all taken money for him I've
taking money from him and I'm telling
you right now Pablo Escobar and Pablo
sitting there the scene where he's
getting the tie from the security guy
and then he walks out was that the scene
where he said you're gonna play with me
and publicly humiliate me watch what I'm
gonna do to you was that kind of what
happened it's sort of but the like you
said the TV series I mean there's some
artistic licenses I I think what drove
Pablo was first of all he did not want
to get extradited to the United States
and second he wanted to show Colombia
that he was the boss that he was going
to negotiate he was going to instruct
Colombia on what his terms would be now
and if you I'm glad you talked about cuz
we studied oh we were used to it
the the motivation was that greed I mean
because if you you know if you look at
the sentence that he got five years in
person billion right you're gonna have
billions and you're only doing five
years but if you look back to what
that when Lara Bonilla unveiled that
mugshot of Pablo that Barristan
he was embarrassing understand Congress
that's so that's what it was
so that embarrassing what here is that
by the way those are the mid-eighties
yeah so it's a very iconic the photo you
see that photo and you see that smile
yeah yeah yeah we always see that smile
yeah you and we say yeah he was in jail
for five minutes you know five minutes
he he gets out do you know you see
sometimes you know somebody is making
their money and they want power they
want fame and then if you if they really
go through the tipping point humiliate
them publicly now you see a different
side of them and sometimes the ego for
some people is so big that you cross
that line you're gonna get it pretty bad
enemy coming after you for a while right
you got to be prepared for that right
you got you got to be prepared and this
is why I think he started with the
violence with killing as many people as
possible I listened to him on the phone
one day and he's talking to his wife
I'll never forget that conversation
telling her how much he loves her so
we're intercepting the phone and he's I
love you I miss you this was during the
surge in the background you hear a guy
yell
it's a shriek he covers the phone just
cover his mouth in other words they're
torturing a guy while he's on the phone
with his wife while he's on the phone
and telling her how much he loves her
and how much he misses her
that was like wow I mean how do you
change you know your emotions that fast
it was two or three seconds I love you
baby I miss you and then there's a guy
who's yelling they're torturing the guy
and he's witnessing it and you know it's
just how does that happen there are some
studies that say that this guy said he's
gonna be a president a long time ago
like yet aspirations are wanting so it's
not like it happened once he started
making money where does this motivation
come from for this ambitious guy you
study his parents one was a teacher it's
not like you know one was a farmer like
what you know what is the fire where is
that fire coming from did you see some
stuff that maybe we don't know about the
famous photo and I think - he was
shunned by the Colombian government
because he was an associate that columns
up lentes
Richmond and I think it was Galan who's
Carlos galn who found out he was a
trafficker so he was ousted so I mean he
is publicly embarrassed by the Colombian
government so you're asking me I'll show
you in my opinion that's all it was I'm
gonna show you you disgrace me when you
go back to Alexander you study that he
had a father that kind of was a drunk
you know drunkard and he was in Iran and
his mother would feed a lot of stuff
into his mind one day you're gonna be
this one day you're gonna conquer the
world one day gonna do this pardon he
had a very interesting combination
between his mom and his dad right on who
he became right there was an Aristotle
that was feeding into his mind on how to
be a leader so there was a perfect
combination of three different
characters in his life do you know of
people that were in his ear that were
because I know his wife would always say
you can one day be a president you can
one day be a president but who else
wasn't his mother was the main his
father really wasn't involved it was a
farmer kept to his you know cows it was
the mother who always kept telling him
what to do the wife was also I mean she
knew about the business of course but I
think it was more of his mother telling
him the directions of what he needed to
do I was thinking just earlier before
that as he's just coming up as he's a
fledgling criminal you know I think he
realized how much money there was to be
made in the drug business and how simple
it was his first reported drug deal was
four I think of 17 kilos and the person
and when he saw how quickly he could
move that how much money could make he
went and killed that person so that
stepped him up one ladder you know one
rung on that ladder towards the top of
the ladders which is where you want to
go now what helped him is he had no
remorse he had no compunction he had no
guilt feelings whatsoever about killing
people was just doing business and so
when you've got that type of that psyche
and that mentality I think that had a
lot to do and then as you get more
powerful and more wealthy you think
you're important now you know and that's
where he decided okay now I want to move
into Congress now I want to be president
now I want that I want that the only the
only reason I ask is because sometimes
you see you know you look at Frank Lucas
Frank Lucas from American grocery didn't
really he had his boss that was putting
a lot of inspiration into him he had
somebody to watch
who was Pablo's example like who was
Pablo following to say I'm following
this guy's footsteps was there anybody
yeah in the history of the cartel I mean
you had Jose Gonzaga Rodriguez gotcha
who was more powerful than Pablo Escobar
was richer because gotcha
had taken over the mo business there's a
famous massacre in Colombia everybody
knows about it where he killed off the
competition
Alberto Molina so he took over that and
how gotcha came up with the concept of
the cocaine labs in Colombia so after
gotcha gets killed Pablo takes over that
organization but my question has always
been how does Pablo rise to that CEO
when you're dealing with the most major
traffickers in Colombia right I mean you
got the most ruthless you got the
biggest baddest traffickers how do you
become boss is that still a question
it's it's still a question until today
for you or no yes because no I mean that
has always been my question how did he
write it so you have other major
traffickers all those it into publicity
that's what I'm that's what I'm not
because you know just if you look at the
Cali brothers you knew they were just
driven by money they were business guys
so to demo was a different story right
and and sometimes sometimes for people
it's just money famous all it is very
few people have that big of an
aspiration like a Pablo does it has to
be something deeper by the way what
happens if Pablo doesn't have the
aspirations running for office that's
his legacy continue or would it
eventually still stop let's just say
Pablo says you know what I don't want to
run for office I want to be a low-key
guy I just want to take these 15
facilities that I have that were
producing cocaine a ton of cocaine a day
let's make it dirty let's make it 40
let's make it 50 maybe let's go to other
countries let's make it in different
places how much bigger would he have
gotten if he had zero aspirations of
being a political leader I think he
would never have been capable of doing
what you're suggesting says let me do
low key because that that ego he had
that personality when you study him when
you listen there inside his custom-built
prison he had a hint of Salvador Dali
original probably worth a couple million
dollars hang in the wall there's a
famous artist in Colombia Fernando
Botero
who was extremely well known he has a
blue taro original hanging don't know
what's worth about 1.5 million dollars
and this was in 1991 1995 see Fletcher
before that charisma he had that is very
active he'd go down and he would recruit
his own sicarios a lot of people do not
know that yeah they were so famous
territory right he would come here yep
he would or famous Catholic Church and
million one of the poorest neighborhood
church --iz and he would have meetings
and he would come in and all those young
thugs 14 15 year-olds they'd hug him you
know he'd kiss them would give him money
and that was the allegiance you know
that was you know you're the biggest
trafficker and you're going down
yourself interesting which I mean that
just shows that personal what you're
talking about that Eagle that here's the
scenario
so he goes into this neighborhood where
people are literally living on the edge
of a trash dump that's where their food
comes from that's where their clothes
comes from their cardboard and pieces of
wood that they create a little living
shelter he comes in he builds low-cost
housing and lets people live there for
free he provides him with food he holds
medical clinics soccer fields he gives
him money gives them food so think about
it now for your mom if you come from a
situation like that now sudden your
mom's got a roof over her head she's got
a lock on her door so you get little bit
of secure you got running water you've
got electricity what are you gonna think
about the guy but I mean this isn't
anything new right if you want to get
the vote go get all the poor people and
give them free food give them free place
to live and you're gonna get their votes
and so here's the point that's not a
Robin Hood which kind of that's the
persona everybody seems to want to
portray oh yeah he wasn't a Rama hurt
these people he manipulated those people
because when he needed a new sicarios
yeah where did he go back to there is a
part of it where this whole Robin Hood
Theory came about because I think when
Pablo died 25,000 people showed up and
they just wanted to touch it all they
wanted to
he was like glorifying that's the way
awful not all the more their parade on
the streets that make you upset when you
see that like do you don't you know
because I mean it's this is history it
happened it does it now well I mean at
that time that emotionally or
emotionally we lost a lot of friends
that were killed by Pablo Escobar you
know in the innocent people
I hated Pablo Escobar but people love
him you know what it's it's a way of
life Colombia's a safe country it says
it's a beautiful place maybe more some
beautiful people and you know what we've
got to say 99.9% of Colombians are great
innocent hard-working people it's that
little 1% of the traffickers that ruin
it you know but there's a lot of yeah
today or now it is we don't tell too
many people but we you know visit Madine
the only thing you cannot do in Madine
do not bat mouth Pablo squawking ready
till today he still has a lot of loyal
files today till today
Wow you still love him so I've seen you
say this that what we saw narcos the
jail was nice but you're saying that
Jill was so what was this jail like that
he chose to build what was the light it
was it was very much like a country club
so Pablo what probably calls a jail cell
is a two-room suite the bathroom has a
jacuzzi tub walk-in closet a safe hidden
behind the drawers and his walk-in
closet on the back side we hang your
long clothes there was a wall there was
a collector back there a hidden space
and so you've pushed the button and the
back wall pops open there's a place to
jump in there and hide in the main in
the main room which was a kitchen and
living room combination he had a
microwave oven a full-size refrigerator
bernetta nice banana bar with the
barstools he had color-coordinated
draperies and upholstery which is you
look at it now it's a little bit gaudy
but you know that's not what you'd
expect to see in a prison cell he had
the million dollar pieces of art hanging
on the wall candles on the tables you go
into the bedroom a custom-built bit
bigger than any king-size beds you've
ever seen his audio-visual Center didn't
have they didn't have cable TV and
satellite TV and Netflix and things like
that back then but he did have all the
latest releases of TV shows and movies
from all around the world
he had a fireplace in behind his desk in
his office area he had pictures hanging
on the wall one of the things you know
if he's this devoted family man when you
when you came into the living report
he took his wanted poster had that frame
hanging on the wall not pictures of his
family and then when you get behind his
desk he took all of his mug shots
had those matted and framed in a
collection because I can see him being
like that I can see he had a collection
of letters folders letters from people
that would write him saying he was a
great guy
there was one letter and we talked about
it it was from a lady who's offering her
daughter to come to the prison and
entertain Pablo Escobar that ain't that
sickening to have his love child yeah
she was thirteen years he was saved and
I was 24 when he first started dating
his wife and white I was 13 so that
right that's but it just goes back to
what you're talking about about Pablo's
persona he kept all the letters that
people would write to him so was he a
woman oh there's parties you know and we
make a little joke there was a lot of
war geez at at the person now that
insult doesn't make him a bad guy right
but that's that's a joke that's a joke
guys yeah but from you because because
the way now let me say this though the
way the way narcosis is presented you
know have your it's a whole different
ball game with you you you look like you
were a step away from being a porn star
let me ask you when you were watching
some of those girls that play those
roles were you like I don't know if she
look like today even though with da guys
a lot of time here man not my wife
thinks up sleeping with out there that's
all Hollywood you also were never
married no I was single at the time I
was saying go but that's you know that's
Hollywood but that's kind of funny so
you were having a good time in Colombia
I was saying but I didn't date you know
communism for months you know I mean
it's and you know what it was hey listen
you made time to have your
extracurricular this is my partner I'm
gonna take that for him he was not
dating Connors so would you ask the girl
what is your political beliefs do you
believe in capitalism or confidence I
can't have sex with you if you believe
in common okay so in somebody was a
woman as he was a party
I remember a lot of negligees that was
your big user himself was your big user
it's not one like Marilyn okay yeah we
never heard people do her but you know a
lot of marijuana use and then how do you
get the Colombian soccer team to come
play at the prison the national soccer
team we found photos there's a famous
goalie about people remember the guy
with a dreadlock Renee Gaeta together
kicked it from there that's the guy that
good that's another that sort of the
outer goal that that guy was killed
later you're talking about the World Cup
when Colombia scored against the cell
I'm planet by the way that does that
killing have anything tied to Pablo or
no yes yes we matter of fact the guy
wait I got killed the guy it was a guy
by the name of hassles guy yawn and we a
lot of documents I think he was finally
arrested he worked for Pablo Escobar
this guy was one of the distributors the
death was all acts not accidental the
death was just at a bar one of the
traffickers I lost a lot of money
because of you and that and that was it
it wasn't a planned it wasn't
premeditated yeah I wasn't premature
were at a bar because of you were out to
a bull but linked back to pop yeah
because this guy used to work for pop
guy walk so the one of my was in essence
yes yes indirectly directly interesting
so now his compound where he lived you
know this whole story about zoos he
built 20 legs some astronomical number
of cars yeah oh there's a in the same
that is that very thing kanopolis was
his pride and joy and we have a lot of
photos Steve talks about it but that was
his headquarters before he was on our
radar that's when they had the parties
people would fly in we had a lot of I
remember talking to traffickers in the
States pirates they fly in meet with
Pablo you know they loaded up the
airplanes in that that was his love and
he had a bullfighting ring there he had
a zoo all the exotic animals he had a
playground with giant dinosaur statutes
for the kids and it was a phenomenal
remember you got the money of the world
in all of those traffickers
what are they trying to do to other
traffickers they're trying to tell them
I have more than you do that's why they
will display it see though though like a
competition between constantly let me
ask you well you know how sometimes you
see names like this and you see
Hollywood celebrities people like that
who want to party with some names like
this was there any of that going on in
Colombia where celebrities from us were
coming down to Colombia to party with
him where that wasn't really the case
with you guys when you were out there I
don't remember hearing about us
celebrities coming down but it wasn't
unusual for him to have like former
Colombian beauty queen he's coming for
parties and things like that beauty
queen yeah politicians their emotions a
lot of politicians came into the ranch
we never saw celebrities so let me ask
you going back to the powerplay with
what happened with Gustavo do you think
like pre Gustavo post Gustavo getting
killed
who was problem-free who was Pablo post
meaning that he lose a lot of his
confidence after Gustavo was gone
Gustavo Gaviria was surrounded come out
with your hands up
comes up with a machine gun we wanted
him alive because we wanted him in the
United States because of all the this
guy had the connections all over the
world but he chose to come out fighting
it was difficult for Pablo to get but
you know he got organized but one thing
like and he never forgave for the
killing of his cousin remember they were
brothers there were more than brothers
they were always together in Gustavo was
I think more of the calm the common
sense type guy Pablo what's the famous
line you're spending too much money or
you're making him what's funny and he's
just a laundry moment this isn't narco
detail there's a lot more money he said
you know we can't they said yeah he said
Edward L Capone did difficult I was a
great light Capone you ever had this was
a great light you know but it was that
type Gustavo was always the common the
the grounding Pablo Pablo you know calm
down calm down
and I remember stories where the other
traffickers or troll was will
and you know and you're chosen to the
interesting phenomena they were
different they were already rich but
they like you know selling dope but
basically don't kill you know important
people you know they would try to tell
them this is gonna cost us you know for
them to come after us and and they were
right that's what caused them to come
after Pablo Escobar you know what and
you're talking about you know Pablo
Escobar's ego that power I remember and
this is wow this is a great example we
took one ordering one of the rates we
took one of the cars and he belonged to
his sister so we took the sister the car
in the dashboard and I have a copy of
that note it basically there was a note
that says if you're thinking of stealing
this car do not this is Pablo Escobar
and this car belongs to my sister
avoid Provos hate that great life it's
really have it on yeah I saw it it's
it's real and signed by Pablo Escobar
avoid problem you know that's the best
insurers a car could ever have you see
that name right there people probably
felt safer if they had him as a backing
so if you saw name there nobody wanted
to mess with him acknowledged ah so so
the numbers I read about are the
following numbers is it more or less
than this
it's he killed the presidential
candidate that's one whose car was
cologne he kissed killed the Minister of
Justice
Lara Bonilla he killed the Attorney
General kind he killed some numbers say
a thousand cops some numbers say three
thousand cops
I think his son Sebastian Maru King aka
juan pablo escobar said my dad in one
week killed five hundred cops this is
his son saying this that in one week he
killed five hundred cops and then
thousands of people and we were talking
about earlier where you hear the number
and some say he killed five thousand
people some killed ten thousand people
and in popeye who was his number one hit
man who's got a mother he's got a
YouTube channel so strange this guy's
got a YouTube channel with six seven
hundred thousand subscribers and he
claims that that Pablo he himself killed
three hundred people for Popeye that he
was a scientist but he said Pablo killed
in a fifty thousand people so as vicious
as narcos series made it to us was it
even more vicious than that like I know
you hear you watch the show and you sit
there and say this is not
close or was it pretty close to it
narcos did not get that right and you
always said that Steve says that and I
believe it that right it there was more
violence it was more vicious there was
more assassinations you know when you're
talking about people you've missed one
of the also newspaper editor
Guillermo Kondo if you do the research
he's the one who writes a knob bad peace
fellow Colombians we need to bring back
extradition
Escobar kills him for writing that are
bad peace on extradition yeah so the
violence that's shown in narco is like
my sister when when she started watching
that she couldn't watch it passed I
think the second episode originally
because of the language and the violence
but I think eventually she did watch the
whole thing but as bad as narcos
portrays the violence in colombia under
a Pablo Escobar's reign it was a lot lot
worse than that and that's what do you
mean by that don't like you what do you
say that give us an idea how much worse
because it's but I mean doesn't get any
worse than some of the stuff is known
and if you go back look at the car bumps
that that's where I always tell people
the car bombs and and you know what we
had never what's car bomb I've never
heard you know I mean you see it you
know used to see it up you know in other
parts of the world but then you know
when you were putting him on on a daily
basis you know ten fifteen car bombs on
a daily basis you know shopping centers
that to me was an all-out I don't care
who dies this is my war on Colombian
really the rest of the world on us to um
the United States I'm going to basically
bring you down to your knees and when he
wouldn't even kill people it wasn't just
you know shoot him in the head move on
he had him tortured when he was going
after somebody especially a political
figure he now he killed them just like
Lara Bonilla he was going after the
entire family very common this was very
common when it was happening it was
common it's like everyday practice yeah
what's it every day you're seeing
somebody get killed everybody there was
something you and you would say what
else can he do that you know your
imagination you could not even fathom
you know the famous commercial airline
the kidnappings were a lot of people
were being kidnapped and there's a
famous lady by the name of Jana her by
her dad used to be the president of
Columbia she was a journalist he
kidnapped a lot of journalists that way
they could write and say Pablo Escobar's
a good person he's looking you know
please Columbia let him have whatever he
wants yeah that's not the reporter right
that's not the Valerie or Kazan that's
by the way that's a real character in a
bright virtue Virginia you know are you
who which looks like her twin and she's
drop-dead gorgeous in real life based on
some of the pictures you see she looks
like they're related and so what was she
really having a relationship with he was
one of his girlfriends and remember he
liked press people so he could convince
him to write good about him that's why
he wanted all that much as Ken today
today business people buy press
companies so they can write good things
about him so not much has changed
so if Pablo if Pablo didn't cross the
line with that and he was in business
and his style have been doing business
wasn't to kill people except put
competition out of business how good
would have Pablo done in business as a
CEO I just don't want to give a guy I
know you don't I know you don't so you
tend to think that he probably would
have done a good job in a legal business
but his business model was based on
violence you can't employ that in a
legal business and be successful so I
don't know I just don't want to give him
credit and say yes he would have been
successful so I will say it if I if he
was he would have been the guy so
litigious he'd be suing everybody to
find us we're getting to the top I can
say that must be taking place so about
well as you guys are going through were
there any stories related to presidents
you know Bush Reagan Clinton was
anything happening that maybe didn't it
wasn't covered in the series of narcos
was there anything outside of them yeah
it was really I remember President Bush
when he was the vice president and when
we started seeing the violence in Miami
where all the wide and said you know
Scarface
the scarf movie IV that was pretty a
great loving a lot of but anyway a lot
of a lot of people
or getting killed in South Florida a lot
of bodies the famous Dadeland Mall
Massacre remember the one o'clock we
started seeing Colombians killing
Colombians in the middle of the day it's
like what is going on
then in South Florida bodies started
coming up all over the place and it was
Colombians and basically I think under
President Bush he was the vice person he
says man and we have a problem here in
South Florida then they started looking
at all the money that was being invested
in Miami the the famous buildings the
famous banks that were taking all the
money and since we needed to do
something about it so he created a task
force a floor attachment South Florida
Task Force which was the beginning and
from there it led on to and and then
from there the pressure was being put on
Colombia to bring back extradition that
was about to a succession
yeah and that's how we that's why he was
so concerned yeah yeah yeah extradition
and bring it back and then you see in
Colombia you have certain people that
are saying wow maybe we need to bring
back extradition because we cannot
handle public square so what happened to
those people public's were killed
Hatchin Lara Bonilla the newspaper
editor so this was this whole war from
Pablo Escobar was based on extradition
so the one question that I think even
till today is not fully answered no one
there isn't really anyone that has a
hundred percent answer this is what
happened right anybody a lot of people
say different stories and we have to
almost take their word for it it's like
faith you know you haven't seen God but
you believe there is a God right so and
and based on what I've read I see three
different stories one of the stories is
that Pablo was killed by the Colombian
police okay because that's who killed
him at the end somebody put a bullet
through his head because you know he was
shot three times
one in the torso one in the leg and one
through the ear that went to form one
ear came out of the other ear right when
you see the picture you kind of see the
autopsy you see how that looks okay so
number one Colombian police is who
killed Pablo and obviously as a nation
you want that to be number one because
Colombia needs that victory
the second scenario you hear about he
was killed by a Delta Force
you know Navy SEAL you know team from
the top you know I have friends from
Delta Force and they know what they're
doing a sniper can be up there knowing
exactly where he's at and take him out
and they're pretty sharp I would they do
so for somebody to get him straight
through the head is not a difficult
thing to do but then that would be the
victory of America if Americans killed
them
number three years what a Sebastian
Moroccan talks about when he says I know
my dad was committing suicide because my
dad always told me you know if they come
to you no one's gonna kill me if you
have a gun with 15 bullets 14 are used
to kill the enemy one is used to kill
yourself because no one should be able
to kill yourself
no one should be able to kill you and
that's why he says my dad called me
seven times that's the story call me
once I wouldn't pick up cuz I knew if I
picked up they're gonna know my dad's
that second time I didn't pick up third
time I didn't pick up four time I didn't
pick up he said I finally picked up on
the seventh time my dad dragged out the
conversation with he and I and that's
when all of a sudden this thing happened
so I know for a fact my dad committed
suicide so it's not the Colombian
victory it's not the US victory so now
you've been asked this question a
million times you've spoken in front of
Y P o EO government organizations here
in the states outside of the states
you've spoken to DEA agents keeps poking
all over the world and you probably get
this ass all the time what's your
version of the answer okay for the let's
address the second one first whether it
was a u.s. special operator where
there's Delta Force or SEAL Team six I
know that it wasn't because when the
operation went down as is the operations
taking place I'm standing in the room
with all the us operators and I'm
certainly not taking anything away from
Harvey I love these guys to death these
are the guys they were not there they
were at the base with me and the reason
I knows because I was there with them
not taking anything away from because
these are the best guys in the world if
we're ever kid man one of them was with
you Steve yep right there in that room
and let me just interject the orders was
that they could not leave the base and
this is for coming from the Pentagon to
the embassy and this guy's obey they
were at the base and Steve was there but
I just want to put a caveat they they
helped us I mean after Escobar gets in
they they help us
in a lot of the electronic messages a
lot of training was done by them but
they could not leave the base and that
would upset them but I mean in like
Steve said this guys are great great
heroes so to you your hundred percent
there it's not a Delta Force or SEAL
Team six no doubt in my mind no doubt in
your mind that's and I and believe me we
love these guys yeah we're not taking
anything away so you are set that you
think the Colombian police is who killed
him absolutely now let's look at that
third theory about the suicide yeah it's
absolutely not true I'm here and I were
local police officers before we became
federal agents I went through the
Academy I was trained on murder
investigations suicide investigations I
worked both when I was in uniform so
that all the photographs that were taken
of Escobar on the roof that day after he
was killed I took those photographs my
primary responsibilities my instructions
from my boss back at the embassy in
Bogota was to confirm this is Pablo
Escobar you got to get up close and
personal to do that the blood and the
guts and the gore and things like that
don't bother me for whatever reason so I
was able to get close enough to look at
the body when there's a suicide by a gun
when you fire a weapon there are little
pieces of gunpowder that come out the
end of that barrel they travel a certain
distance before they lose their velocity
and fall to the ground
if you shoot yourself in the ear with a
gun the Gunpowder that comes out of that
barrel is certainly going to travel that
far and it will leave burn marks in the
skin you can go online and look at these
photographs
nobody has ever I couldn't find them
there are no powder burns on the side of
crominus it as well face it all yeah so
I tells me it wasn't a suicide the third
so your first theory was a Colombian
national police that's absolutely who it
was you know we worked with these guys
we lived with them never caught them
lying to us about anything what
difference would it make let me ask you
this what let's just say it's not the
Columbo national police let's say he
committed suicide if he did would that
take away the victory of you guys
killing him and the victory goes to you
is that would let you say if it is that
let's just say we come out and said this
guy did kill himself would that make a
difference you know what yes yes yes it
would
I appreciate you saying that yes I mean
it would because like I said look at the
long time you went after this guy look
at all the people here look at all the
massacres the violence and then
he committed suicide that like Steve
said that wasn't the case it was the the
search bloc and not the regular Columbia
Police Colonel Martinez in his groups
Colonel Martinez was not there right
yeah in for the record let me get my
situation cuz I think in the movie in
the series they put me I'm getting
disciplined back in Washington I want
know the Ambassador copying up in sent
me to Miami there was a famous informant
Navigon T who had he was the one
responsible for gotcha how he got ahold
of the Ambassador rice I think I know
how but anyway so the ambassador cost me
I'd imagine so here again I'm playing
you're going to Miami said sir oh
because there's an informant that's
gonna tell you where it's Quarrier sir
we were very close where you know it was
like the day before you're telling him
server very yes yeah yeah we're very
closer he's not anywhere they thought he
was in Haiti as if he's right here in
Medina and I get ordered in ambassadors
this was a strong-willed ambassador and
brush it's like a precedent you know he
says you will get on a plane or I got on
the plane and ironic it is great cuz I
get to buy heavy and you know how I
found out the public where it gets
killed the informant is on the phone the
guy who was supposed to tell me where
Escobar was he says have you here they
just killed Pablo Escobar what is your
reaction like you know and at least II
was there and you know what he always
had a camera and you know anyway those
photos would not exist if see one there
so I get on a plane back and it's all
the press people on that plane I'll
never forget the Univision the Telemundo
you know people I see the anchors it is
full of press people coming back to
Colombia the next day what kind of field
day they would have on the airplane it
was that's the irony but you know what I
was happy of course you know I went the
next day he was there congratulate
really did you see the body no no never
never did you know talked to all the
guys congrats you know I'm saying it was
a victory for them I think more for
Colombia because of all the criticism
that they got it was a victory for us
for all the people he killed all our
friends I lost
good friends so it was a victory for
everybody I didn't have to be there I
could say Steve was there but you know
it was just something great it was you
know the weight of the world had been
lifted on you know there was times
remember when we say man I just hope he
surrenders let's get her over let's all
go home it was that way what so let me
ask you was there ever a feeling of was
there you know how you hear some stories
you know I wanted to be a millionaire so
bad and then I became a million I'm like
oh my gosh I'm a millionaire so what you
know I want to win this so bad and then
so to sum they're like I don't know if
it's gonna feel that but because I'm so
much hungry about the chase and the hunt
versus actually it becoming a reality
you feel like now what did you ever have
that feeling what was it like finally we
got this you know a bastard you can use
a different word if you choose to was
there that feeling of we got him there
was that feeling because it felt like
the weight of the world was lifted off
our shoulders yeah but and and we're not
trying to be overly humble when we say
this that was one investigation so when
you complete an investigation you move
on to the next case and that's exactly
what we did once Escobar's gone of
course my wife and I we came back to the
United States for Christmas vacation you
know we came back to Bogota in early
January it's time to go back to work and
work the next case how much of a break
did you have after you know December 2nd
well there was there was a lot of loose
ends that had to be tied up you know so
it took us several months and I think we
probably worked on until I transferred
out in June and I left in Nevada cold
but well we're there there was a lot of
pressure from the United States Oh from
you know DOJ who you DEA to us yeah it
would have done or to get it done of
course you know a lot of people go tell
but there was uh we'd get calls like we
you know I mean we had to go brief
people up in Washington what would they
tell like how much longer do we need
them what else do you need right what
else do you need they were supportive
but they wanted action yeah and because
everybody knew Pablo Escobar the fight
against Iran from the United States
there was a lot of pressure being put on
us to go after public school to get into
getting now the picture obviously the
famous picture that you took right when
you see that picture today what's your
reaction I'm proud of it now I mean
when I got thing was taking the
photographs of the police officers you
know standing over the body and then
they start grouping up and wanted group
photos and I mean how many now these are
our friends you know these are the guys
that we faced death with and survived
you know that's a very close bond with
each other and they're saying Steve
Steve come on over like well they
actually call me sneak stick the neck
stick stick coming at your photograph so
I you know gave somebody camera and got
in there got my photo you know probably
not my proudest moment at the time but
that was the elation that everybody feel
that felt that this guy would you get
some criticism for the pic or no oh yeah
Washington was not happy about that
wasn't happy now was a Colombian
government not happy or dick could care
less it was mainly Washington the cops
are okay with it I don't know about the
rest of the government so anybody that's
a Pablo fan probably wasn't too happy
about that picture but yeah and it was
never meant to be released somebody in a
Colombian national police released as
how it got out but you know I don't
having a remorse I don't have any guilt
feelings about it the reason we're all
smiling as pictures is because we all
knew effective immediately at the second
that Pablo died every citizen in the
country Columbia is safer simply because
one man's gone and if you go back and do
your research you'll find out that the
murder statistics support that theory
eighty percent is the number I
understand yeah eighty percent of
following Europe because one man was can
you imagine the power of one men drop in
the amount of activity by 80 percent
it's unbelievable that is unbelievable
what do you guys do is there a ritual
you have every year on December 2nd you
guys do something on December 2nd level
[Laughter]
analyst who was assigned to Pablo
Escobar he sends an email happy and
every year he commemorates every year in
like you said we do a while shout out
for our analyst because they did a great
job when you go after this traffickers
you need that Intel it's not like you
know in the movies onward you need all
that eat so work to help you that's it
and thank you to Craig for that annual
to you I asked you this earlier but but
I want everybody also know this is from
the outside you know when you watch it
narcos does a great job showing that you
guys became very good friends till today
how strong is your friendship how strong
is the bond between
we top pretty much every day we Sweezy
said we you know I mean last year we did
82 appearances around the world I see
how here as much as I see my wife no
family now you K - were coming up here
we - and have you yet seen the whole
thing have you had seen narcos now
you're actually the first series I saw
the third one number two I'm still I'm
waiting I'm still I'll watch it
so still emotionally you can yeah I mean
I just brings back like I said I lost
some good friends of mine you don't end
that you know and this is why when we
say Pablo Escobar was a revenge of
course it was I'd be lying if I said it
in every single every time I keep saying
that was a revenge like it was it's I
have wanted to kill this guy yeah yeah
we tell the truth did you want him alive
or you wanted him dead heavily - I do
he would have the US government want him
alive bored they just could care let's
just let's you want this guy dead as
well nobody ever came out and told us I
known as kill him as well you know I sit
there and I watch your story and I you
know I'm always curious when I see
somebody that becomes a DEA agent and
decides to go take your life we were
with Joe Pistone recently Joe Pistone
was Donnie Brasco he worked with the
Italian mob and he worked heavily on
taking on the Bonanno family and
partially the Colombo family and for six
years he was undercover and when I hear
your story you were married at the time
your wife was living in Bogota right and
you'd be gone I think one time he said
he was gone for five weeks the medina
your way with from your wife how did you
make that work because his marriage is
still intact Jose which I cannot believe
and apparently yours is as well what was
the secret what system did you guys have
to make your marriage work I just
married the right woman you know she was
she understood the you know the desire
for excitement you know we were much
younger and
and we just liked exciting things but
you know what she liked it just as much
because when we were in Miami you know I
had one partner there was shot and a
deal gone bad and Informer killed and
just a lot of activity going on in Miami
in the 80s and after four years of Miami
she came to me one day she said this has
been exciting what's the next most
experiencing we can do that's amazing
I forgot the idea of going to Colombia
it took a little while for her to come
to grips with it but finally she came
one day and she said if we're gonna do
it let's do it while we're young
when we were having lunch earlier today
and I was you know Mario asked you the
producers did they think it was gonna be
this big of a hit as it became on
Netflix well I think the producers did
but I mean I know we didn't thinking if
I wanted to hear this story we turned
down a couple of producers before Eric
Newman came along so when we say and we
say this all the time but it's
absolutely true no one is more shocked
by the popularity of narcos than us how
much would your life change with the
documentary came out like pre narcos
after not the documentary to this series
how much did your life change 180
degrees right we never we never dreamt
we'd be doing this in a retirement we
didn't ever have the opportunity to meet
you in the crew here in the world will
travel in places we never would have
gone so it's had a you know very adverse
effect you know from being retired doing
nothing and all of a sudden the series
comes out and I saw the first one I said
no one's gonna watch it you know and
then all of a sudden man we're starting
to it's you know what you know we got we
got to go to speak in Kyrgyzstan and
Kazakhstan we went to Sydney Australia
and we got to speak at the Sydney Opera
House and sold it out no I mean this is
this is just like know things that are
unbelievable now burn so that out I mean
it's just been great so but like Steve
says we tell the we tell the truth we
tell the truth before we wrap up I do
want to say this publicly you know to
know that I'm sure many many many
families in Colombia are glad that you
guys put your life on the line to make
sure people are protected there and
there's an element of the way you
deliver the messages I can't believe how
much of respect and love you're given to
a country like Colombia to have whole
you know that it's it's very interesting
to see America is known at this powerful
nation that we like to take all the
victories where this were this with that
and you're actually taking a complete
different approach saying hey they did
it were just a couple cops and you're
taking this approach and and it
slaughter a lot of respect from you to
you a lot of respect for me to
appreciate you guys coming up but this
is this is one last thing what do you
guys working on right now so if I
watching this I want to follow some of
your stuff you know what what is
something you're working on right now
that people can follow and find out more
about well actually we've got several
things working but if you go to DEA
narcos comm you know that's our website
you can see there's a calendar on there
show you where we're speaking around the
world we're writing a book we're working
with a group called the lost clipper
project where we're working an
eighty-year-old cold case file involving
the murders or 15 Americans we've
partnered up with the partnership for
safe medicines that is addressing
counterfeit medications coming to the
United States
we're on Capitol Hill three weeks ago
talking to the House of Representatives
Committee about that particular subject
we're working with a couple of producers
on potential new and this is very
potential this is not a done deal but a
potential new TV series addressing the
heroin opioid fentanyl epidemic in the
United States right now so it's there's
a lot of irons in the fire it's things
that again we just never thought
anything like this would happen to us so
it's fun that's great and and you're on
Twitter DEA narcos and you're on
Instagram DEA
narcos what I want you to do is I want
you to send them a tweet after watching
this first of all go follow them and
then send them it sweet DEA narcos their
handle and let them know if you've
watched the show what do you love most
about them what you picked up from
today's interview and with that being
said gentlemen thank you so much for
coming out here in Dallas
appreciate your time truly really
appreciate you guys coming up thank you